In the past century, there have been many attempts to treat cancer with low levels of electric and magnetic fields. We have developed noninvasive biofeedback examination devices and techniques and discovered that patients with the same tumor type exhibit biofeedback responses to the same, precise frequencies. Intrabuccal administration of 27.12 MHz radiofrequency (RF) electromagnetic fields (EMF), which are amplitude-modulated at tumor-specific frequencies, results in long-term objective responses in patients with cancer and is not associated with any significant adverse effects. Intrabuccal administration allows for therapeutic delivery of very low and safe levels of EMF throughout the body as exemplified by responses observed in the femur, liver, adrenal glands, and lungs. In vitro studies have demonstrated that tumor-specific frequencies identified in patients with various forms of cancer are capable of blocking the growth of tumor cells in a tissue- and tumor-specific fashion. Current experimental evidence suggests that tumor-specific modulation frequencies regulate the expression of genes involved in migration and invasion and disrupt the mitotic spindle. This novel targeted treatment approach is emerging as an appealing therapeutic option for patients with advanced cancer given its excellent tolerability. Dissection of the molecular mechanisms accounting for the anti-cancer effects of tumor-specific modulation frequencies is likely to lead to the discovery of novel pathways in cancer.

While their existence had been already hypothesized in antiquity, magnetism and electricity were first clearly described in the 16th and 18th centuries, respectively. In 1820, Oersted was the first to identify and report an interaction between electricity and magnetism by showing that a magnetic needle is deflected by electric current[1],[2]. Subsequently, Faraday showed that a changing magnetic field induces an electric field, and Maxwell unified mathematically the theories of electricity and magnetism[3]. In 1895, Lorentz[4] refined the theory of electromagnetism following the discovery that the electron was the elementary particle carrying the electric charge. Additional electromagnetic waves were found such as visible light, ultraviolet light, γ and X rays, leading to a description of the electromagnetic spectrum with the classification of all electromagnetic waves according to their frequencies.
The beginning of the 20th century saw the first medical applications of electromagnetic fields (EMF), notably in the diagnosis and therapy of various diseases such as cancer. The assumption was that external application of electromagnetic energy could correct disease-causing altered electromagnetic frequencies or energy fields within the body[5].
Abrams invented various machines with the goal to cure diseases, notably cancer[6],[7]. He claimed that diseases could be cured by transmitting back to the disease the same electronic “vibratory rate” it was transmitting. Between 1923 and 1924, Scientific American magazine set up a committee to investigate Abrams's results[8] and concluded “the claims advanced on behalf of the electronic reactions of Abrams, and electronic practice in general, are not substantiated”[6]. Lakhovsky developed the Radio-Cellulo-Oscillator in the 1920s[9]. This device produced high frequency (RF) EMF around 150 MHz. He postulated that EMF reinforced “the oscillations of the cell.” Although a controversial figure in his time, he seems to have had some success with his treatments[10].
Rife hypothesized that a number of bacilli were causal factors in many diseases, especially cancer. In the mid 1930s, he developed a microscope[11] able to see these bacilli and invented the Rife Frequency Generator, commonly called Rife Ray Machine, which he claimed could diagnose and eliminate diseases like cancer by tuning into electrical impulses given off by diseased tissue. The American Medical Association condemned Rife's experiments.
Until recently, virtually all medical devices aimed at treating cancer using low levels of electric and/or magnetic fields were considered quackery because of lack of scientific proof [12].

Diagnostic and Therapeutic Uses of Electromagnetic Fields
High-energy ionizing radiation is frequently used in medicine for both the diagnosis [computed tomography (CT) and X-ray radiograply] and treatment (radiotherapy) of disease. The use of low-intensity RF EMF in medicine is much less common (Figure 1). While uncertainties regarding efficacy remain, there is increasing evidence that some forms of RF EMF exposure may be beneficial for the diagnosis and treatment of disease

The electromagnetic spectrum is depicted in blue. Environmental exposures with known or possible negative consequences are shown in red. Exposures received as part of medical diagnosis or treatment are shown in green.

Magnetoencephalography (MEG) is a noninvasive modality used to differentiate among neoplastic tissue types in the brain, with the potential to be used in combination with CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)[13]. A modality called TRIMprob has shown promising sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of prostate and rectal cancers by exploiting differences in tissue resonance between neoplastic and normal tissues[14]. Thus, optimization of RF EMF diagnostic modalities to complement current screening methods may lead to improved diagnostic accuracy.
EMF has also been used as a therapeutic modality (Table 1). Pulsed EMF have shown efficacy on osteoarthritis[15]. Alternating electric fields have been used to induce fracture healing, with suggested efficacy similar to that of bone graft[16]. The proposed action of pulsed EMF is through the induction of directed migration and differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells[17]. Currently, RF EMF is used as a therapeutic option in cases ranging from tibial stress fractures to spinal cord injury.
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a therapeutic option commonly used to treat malignancies including breast cancer, colorectal cancer, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and especially surgically unresectable metastases[18]. RFA is administered with medical devices operating between 460 and 550 kHz and delivering therapeutic energy to soft tissues[19]. This modality destroys tumor tissue through heat-induced necrosis by raising their temperature to approximately 100°C for approximately 15 min[18].
Laboratory and clinical evidence suggests that certain frequencies within the RF EMF range of the spectrum may have antitumor effects without causing hyperthermia in patients with breast cancer, HCC, ovarian cancer, thyroid cancer, or glioblastoma multiforme[20]–[22]. The NovoTTF-100A technology applies alternating electric fields by means of electrodes placed on the skin overlying tumor-harboring body parts. This was the first EMF device of its kind approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of the United States based on the results of a phase III trial for treating recurrent glioblastoma showing efficacy similar to the standard-of-care chemotherapy regimen but with fewer adverse effects[23].
Pulsed electric fields have been developed for localized treatment of tumors. This approach is based on the use of short electric pulses inducing either irreversible or reversible changes in cell membrane permeabilization. Irreversible changes lead to cell death, and reversible changes allow for markedly increased chemotherapy penetration[24]. The addition of therapeutic modalities based on RF EMF with minimal adverse effects is an exciting prospect for patients with cancer.
One final consideration with RF EMF-based therapies is possible synergy with frequently used chemotherapies. RF EMF in combination with bevacizumab and cyclophosphamide demonstrated no increase in adverse effects clinically, and similar findings were reported in vitro when EMF was used in combination with paclitaxel or cisplatin[20],[22]. These findings suggest that patients may not experience additional adverse effects from undergoing both chemotherapy and RF EMF therapy; moreover, simultaneous treatment with both modalities may have a synergistic effect.
Rationale for the Therapeutic Use of Amplitude-modulated Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields for the Systemic Treatment of Cancer
We have previously identified several frequencies in patients with chronic insomnia using biofeedback methods. We demonstrated that the intrabuccal administration of very low and safe levels of 27.12 MHz RF EMF, amplitude-modulated at 42.7 Hz, has a sleep-inducing effect in healthy subjects[25],[26]. However, administration of the same signal to patients with insomnia did not yield any therapeutic benefits. In contrast, administration of a combination of the four frequencies most commonly identified in patients with chronic insomnia (2.7 Hz, 21.9 Hz, 42.7 Hz, and 48.9 Hz) resulted in significant improvements of total sleep time and sleep latency as assessed by polysomnographic evaluation[27],[28]. These early findings suggested that a combination of several frequencies is needed to achieve a therapeutic effect on chronic insomnia.
In 2001, Barbault et al.[20] hypothesized that the growth of human tumors may be sensitive to specific modulation frequencies. To test this hypothesis, they initiated a patient-based research using novel biofeedback devices and techniques, which led to the discovery that patients with the same tumor type had biofeedback responses to the same frequencies, irrespective of their sex, age, or ethnic status[20]. Frequencies identified in patients with cancer were predominantly found above 1,000 Hz. This range is significantly higher than the range within which insomnia frequencies had been identified (<300 Hz). They also discovered that, in contrast to what had been observed in patients with insomnia, biofeedback responses were only observed at very precise frequencies. This prompted the development of highly precise frequency synthesizers for the detection of tumor-specific frequencies. Interestingly, the majority of frequencies identified in a given tumor type was only found in patients with the same tumor type[20]. For example, 85% of the frequencies identified in patients with HCC were only found in other patients with HCC. Similarly, 75% of the frequencies identified in patients with breast cancer were only found in patients with the same tumor type[20]. They also discovered that a small number of frequencies, e.g., 1,873.477 Hz, 2,221.323 Hz, 6,350.333 Hz, and 10,456.383 Hz, were found in the majority of patients with breast cancer, HCC, prostate cancer, and pancreatic cancer[20]. Examination of healthy individuals without a diagnosis of cancer did not reveal any biofeedback responses to the frequencies identified in patients with a diagnosis of cancer.
Clinical Experience with Intrabuccal Administration of Amplitude-modulated Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields
After having successfully identified tumor-specific frequencies in 163 patients with cancer, Barbault et al.[20] offered compassionate treatment to 28 of these patients with advanced cancer and limited therapeutic options. Treatment was administered with a portable device built with the same high precision frequency synthesizer as that used for the identification of tumor-specific frequencies. They chose the 27.12 MHz carrier frequency, as it is universally approved for medical use. The 27.12 MHz signal was amplitude-modulated at the specific frequencies identified in patients diagnosed with cancer. The frequencies were emitted sequentially, each for 3 s from the lowest to the highest frequency, and the cycle was continuously repeated for 1 h. Treatment was administered 3 times a day, i.e., for a total of 3 h until disease progression or death. Intrabuccal administration of 27.12 MHz RF EMF with the TheraBionic device results in a whole body absorption of very low levels of EMF (Figure 2). The maximum specific absorption rate of the applied RF averaged over any 10 g of tissue is estimated to be less than 2 W per kg[21].

